# CSCI 1061u - Programming Workshop 2 

## Winter 2017

### Assignment 1 - Due by Midnight Sun. Feb 7 

#### Q1 - Write a `wc` clone. (Weight 50%)

You are asked to develop a clone of the `wc` utility found in most Unix systems.  Your `wc` utility should display the number of lines, words, and bytes contained in each input file on the standard output.  Consider the following content stored in a text file called `hello-world.txt`

~~~txt
me: hello world
me: how do you do?
world: i am doing great.
me: are you really?  what about global warming?
~~~

We will use `wc` utility to count the number of lines, word, and bytes in `hello-world.txt` as follows:

~~~bash
$ wc hello-world.txt
	4		21		108		helloworld.txt
~~~

A few items to remember:

1. A word is defined as a string of characters delimited by white space characters.  White space characters are the set of characters for which the iswspace(3) function returns true.
- A line is defined as a string of characters delimited by a <newline> character.
- Characters beyond the final <newline> character will not be included in the line count.
- You are **not** allowed to use the built-in `wc` to do the work for you.  
- You are only allowed to use basic C++ functionality including `iostream` and `fstream`.  You are not to use STL `string` class.  (_Hint you need to store the contents of the file in a character array_). 

##### What to submit

Please submit `q1.cpp` file via Blackboard.  I am including the `helloworld.txt` file for your perusal.

#### Q2 - Write a program that can compress a text file consisting of English language alphabet [A-Z] using run-length encoding scheme.  (Weight 50%)

##### Run-Length Encoding

The key idea is to replace the repeating character by itself and the number of times that it has been repeated.  Consider the following string:

~~~txt
HELLO WORLD
~~~

This can be re-written as

~~~txt
HEL2O WORLD
~~~

Notice that since `LL` was repeated, it was repeated by `L2`.  2 here indicates that letter `L` was repeated 2 times.

Here's another example:

~~~txt
AAAABDGGGADDADGDAD
~~~

Can be represented as

~~~txt
A4BDG3AD2ADGDAD
~~~

You will run the code as follows:

To encode

~~~bash
$ rle -e -i input.txt -o output.rle
~~~

And to decode

~~~bash
$ rle -d -i output.rle -o output.txt
~~~

##### What to submit

Please submit `q2.cpp` file via Blackboard.

### Parting Thoughts

Start early and you'll do great.  Best of luck!