# CSCI 1061u - Programming Workshop 2 

## Winter 2017

### Assignment 3 - Due by Midnight April 2 

#### Part 1 [70 marks]

Your goal is to develop a program that can be used to perform keyword searches in a text files in the local directory.  Say you your local directory contains the following files (text files with extension .txt)

~~~plain
$ ls
.
..
dog.jpg
file1.txt
file2.txt
pride and prejudice.txt
gilgamesh.txt
emma by jane austin.txt
~~~

When we run your program as follows

~~~bash
$ ./search <keyword-1> <keyword-2> <keyword-3>
~~~

The program will produce the following output

~~~bash
keyword-1:
	Found in "file1.txt" at line 3
	Found in "file2.txt" at line 4
	Found in "gilgamesh.txt" at line 3 (2 times)
keyword-2:
	Not found
keyword-3:
	Found in "emma by jane austin.txt" at line 73 (5 times)
~~~

_Note that dog.jpg was ignored, since it doesn't have .txt extension._

#### Part 2 [30 marks]

In the previous part, your program processes the *database* (meaning, the list of text files in the current folder) anew each time it is used to perform search.  This clearly cannot scale.  Can you think of ways where the program doesn't have to process the entire database everytime a search is performed?  

So then

~~~bash
$ ./search --make-index
~~~

will process the database, saving the relevant info, and

~~~bash
$ ./search <keyword-1> <keyword-2> <keyword-3>
~~~

will behave as before (except now it won't have to process the database from scratch every time a search is performed).  Briefly describe your solution.

_Is it any faster?_ 

### Programming suggestions

- You are free to use all of STL for this assignment
- To those of you are feeling adventurous, I suggest that you look into [Boost C++](http://www.boost.org/) for figuring out how to find the list of files in the current directory. 
- If Boost C++ library is not your cup of tea, you may want to look at the `DIR` structure available in `dirent.h` to find the list of files in a directory.
- It is worthwhile to look at `std::map` structure for setting up indices for quick seach queries.

### What to submit.

Submit your source and make files via Blackboard.

### Parting Thoughts

Start early and you'll do great.  Best of luck!
